Micropayments and Mental Transaction Costs

We present intuitive arguments for why micropayments have not succeeded
on the Internet. The "hassle factor" for customers associated with such transactions is characterized. A framework of mental transaction costs and price
granularity is then presented, and arguments about micropayments recast in its
light. Finally, we make some suggestions for reducing the mental transaction
costs of Internet commerce.

1 Introduction
Some Internet payment system projects promise dramatically lower transaction
costs, so that we can achieve micropayments (e.g. [Be95], [GMAGS95], [RS96]).
Other projects propose more sophisticated forms of microtransaction [MD88].
To what extent can transction costs be reduced in these ways? This paper
will argue that mental transaction costs raise fundamental barriers to customer
acceptance of ne grained bundling and pricing. We will explore the problems
both informally and through a closer examination of three sources of customer
cognitive expenditures.
These mental accounting costs, not the physical or computational or amortized R&D costs of a payment or billing method, set the main lower bound on
price granularity. Judging from price granularity trends such as the trend towards at rates in online services, online price granularity is far above suggested
micropayment levels of a few cents or even fractions of a cent. The mental accounting costs for a typical on-line consumer seem to be somewhat higher than
those in more familiar areas of commerce.
Customer mental transaction costs come from at least three sources: uncertain cash ows, incomplete and costly observation of product attributes, and
incomplete and costly decision making.

1.1 Cognitive Versus Technological Transaction Costs

For electronic commerce economics, it's important to distinguish between technological and mental transaction costs. When technologists talk about transaction costs, they are usually talking about computational and network costs.
1

Thus the claim that micropayment technologies, which dramatically reduce
these costs, will reduce "transaction costs". The signi cance of such technological reductions depends on the accompanying cognitive costs already being
very low, since these payments don't address cognitive costs.
Economists (e.g. [B82], [W85], [H89]), on the other hand, usually, when
using the term "transaction costs", refer implicitly to cognitive costs. One goal
of this paper is to make these assumptions explicit. Sometimes these mental
transaction costs can be reduced with the aid of technology: whence the claim
that tools like Internet search engines can reduce the transaction costs associated
with comparing the attributes of goods and services.
In examining micropayments, this paper will assume that the technological
costs of the payment system itself are zero, and will examine what limits are
set by the mental transaction costs associated with the retail transactions targeted by micropayments. We will explore the possibilities of, and barriers to,
automating, and thus potentially greatly reducing, the mental processes which
impose mental transaction costs.
This paper examines decision processes which take place in the mind of the
customer rather than on a computer, as well as the bottlenecks which are caused
by the need to communicate between a computer and that mental process. Also,
we discuss some related basic barriers to automated shopping.
This paper argues that customer mental transaction costs are signi cant and
ubiquitous, so much so that in real world circumstances cognitive costs usually
well outweigh technoligical costs, and indeed technological resources are best
applied towards the objective of reducing cognitive costs. Furthermore, technological costs will continue to fall while cognitive costs remain constant, and
(more arguably) will fall faster than technological cost can be substituted for
mental costs by discovering and automating the relevant mental processes. Customer mental transaction costs will soon dominate the technological transaction
costs of the payment system used in the transaction (if they don't already), and
micropayment technology e orts which stress technological savings over cognitive savings will become irrelevant. This paper will suggest some ways to achieve
cognitive savings.

1.2 Supplier Cost Structure

[BB97] and [FOS97] discuss bundling, and thus price granularity, from the suppliers' point of view. When marginal costs are small compared to amortization
of xed cost (e.g. a particular content work, much Internet infrastructure, etc.)
it makes no sense, in the face of customer preference for at pricing, to charge
ne per unit costs to amortize a one-time investment, except in some exceptional cases, such as where congestion pricing provides major improvements in
service quality.
This paper provides explanations for a strong customer preference for at
pricing. These are so signi cant, we suggest that customer cognitive costs outweigh congestion pricing and supplier cost structure issues at micropayment
levels in almost all retail markets. In contrast to previous work, this paper
2

focuses on costs imposed on customers by bundling and price granularity decisions.

2 Informal Arguments Against Micropayments
Consider a feature fairly independent of the particular payment system: the
statement of charges. Here lies a tradeo here between completeness and complexity. On the one hand, merely summarizing charges creates the opportunity
for salami frauds, allowing widely distributed false or exaggerated microcharges
to go undetected. Furthermore, parties reading only the summaries get no feedback by which they can adjust their behavior to minimize costs. On the other
hand, a statement too complex for customers to read also allows fraud, error,
and inecient usage to go undetected, because one or both parties cannot understand the rationale for the charges in relation to the presumed agreement on
terms of service and payment. The same kind of reasoning applies to working
these things out in the head instead of on paper, as is often done in small cash
transactions. A basic requirement for market pricing to work is that both sides
to a transaction be able to map charges to value obtained or rendered, so that
they can adjust their buying or selling behavior accordingly.
There seems here to be a fundamental cognitive bottleneck. One proposed
solution to this has been "intelligent agents". But since these agents are programmed remotely, not by the consumer, it is dicult for the consumer to
determine whether the agent is acting the consumers' best interests, or in the
best interests of the counterparty { perhaps, necessarily, at least as dicult
as reading the corresponding full statement of charges. Furthermore, the user
interface to enable consumers to simply express their sophisticated preferences
to an agent is lacking, and may represent another fundamental cognitive bottleneck.
Communications companies have found billing to be a major bottleneck. By
some estimates, up to 50% of the costs of a long distance call are for billing,
and this is on the order of a $100 billion per year market worldwide[4]. Internet
providers have been moving to a at fee in order to minimize these costs, even
though this creates the incentive for network resource overusage.
A micropayments system assumes a solution to the mental accounting problem. If somebody could actually solve the this problem, rather than merely
claiming to have solved it via some mysterious means ("intelligent agents", et.
al.), the savings would be enormous even in existing business such as long distance and Internet service { not to mention all the new business models made
possible by lower transaction costs (e.g., [MD88]).

3 Example - Electricity Bills
Sometimes statements account for transactions in gratuitously small increments,
such as the 100 watt-hour resolution on some electrcity bills. There are plenty
3

of things most people normally don't work out regarding their electricity bills,
which could improve the value they get for their electricity payments:
 Which appliances are using more electricity with less personal bene t (not
available on the electricity bill { but one can conceive of a personal accounting program tied to smart appliances that let you do this).
 How to better balance electric vs. gas heat (you could compute this in
detail and save a few bucks, but you'd earn extra money faster by moonlighting).
 If the electricity company was a less reliable and widely known entity,
you also might not trust them with the billing and would recompute it
to the resolution you felt comfortable with, and accept fraud or ne-print
trickery below that level. (Since electricity is fungible and the pricing
ruleset small you could have a program check the bill, which is ecient
if it catches enough ne-print shenanigans for enough people to recoup
software development and marketing costs).
The reason we don't do these things is that they're not worth the brain
cycles: we have reached a mental accounting barrier.

4 Price Granularity
We can characterize four ways to set prices:
1. negotiated price
2. congestion pricing (variable but posted price/small value unit)
3. fungible (one price/small value unit)
4. at fee (one price/large value unit)
Each of these levels successively imposes fewer mental transaction costs on the
customer than the previous level.
Haggling is a good example of the substantial role mental transaction costs
play in economies. There occurs historically and across societies a great decline
of retail bargaining as societies grow wealthier. Retail prices become a smaller
total fraction of customer wealth. For similar reasons, which are the subject of
this paper, prices themselves can become irrelevant at suciently small fractions
of customer wealth.

4.1 Attributes and Preferences

What does it mean when an economist says a person "prefers" good X to good
Y? Often economists just measure this by how much the person is willing to
pay for X versus how much for Y. We call this the "supplier observed explicit
preference".
4

Barzel [B82] gives the example of an apple: the customer prefers an apple
that tastes good. The customer cannot adequately describe this taste to another
person or to software [P58]. Furthermore, this attribute cannot be observed
while shopping. This we call a tacit preference. Instead the customer uses an
observable attribute, e.g. the color, as a proxy attribute. We call this a customer
observed explicit preference. Suppliers can often also observe these attributes
mapped to the customer behavior, and thus the corresponding explicit (revealed)
preference.
The di erences between these kinds of preferences are usually glossed over.
However, they become important if, for example, we wish to have the user choose
among goods, or delegate this task to a software agent by communicating his
preferences to that software.
This model of preferences will be developed further in subsequent sections.

4.2 The Function of Prices

Our account of price granularity is based on a subjectivist [M35],[H45] view of
prices. The function of prices, from the point of view of a customer, is to let the
shopper map his personal resources (budget) to his tacit preferences (unique and
not directly observable). This requires a signi cant cognitive e ort, which sets
the most basic lower bounds on transaction costs. For example, comparing the
personal value of a large, diverse set of low-priced goods might require a mental
expenditure greater than the prices of those goods (where mental expenditure
may be measurable as the opportunity costs of not engaging in mental labor for
wages, or of not shopping for a fewer number of more comparable goods with
lower mental accounting costs). In this case it makes sense to put the goods
together into bundles with a higher price and an initutive synergy, until the
mental accounting costs of shoppers are suciently low.

4.3 Fungibility

Another x is possible for fungible commodities: charge a xed price per unit,
which the shopper can evaluate from just the accumulated number of units and
price information. As a concrete example, in a recent U.S. ad campaign AT&T
is betting that its $.15 at rate more attractive than Sprint's $.10-who knows
variable rate { that it is worth the vendor forgoing congestion pricing, and the
shopper forgoing deep discounts, in order to have a predictable rate, turning
phone time into a fungible commodity, and thus saving on mental accounting
costs.
Alas, most Internet commerce is not fungible: content, services, mail-order
products, and so on. Some Internet Server Provider (ISP) services can be sold as
fungible (eg disk space, connect time) only at the expense of foregoing congestion
pricing and other pricing methods that, if it were not for mental accounting
costs, might be quite ecient. Furthermore, even for fungible commodities each
user has a unique curve of diminishing returns.
5

Software would have to let the shopper determine and input his volume
preference curve (in some intuitively familiar way, without presupposing the
shopper is familiar with economic theory) before it could adequately act in his
interests; not to mention the complications of temporal preferences, nonlinear
interactions between commodities fungible when in isolation, and so on.
This user interface solution for the case of fungible commodities suggests a
better strategy for tackling the more general problem of mental accounting in
online commerce: develop better ways for the shopper to communicate his personal preferences to software. Marketers have long devised schemes to to get this
kind of information: detailed surveys, tracking of user behavior and responses,
etc. Arguably Web services like www. re y.com are the most advanded in this
regard. Fire y creates a kind of "subjective space" of musical preferences in
which the shopper can navigate and nd new music that they are more likely
to prefer.
Assuming that software can represent certain preferences, it is a more straighforward problem for software to map these representations to speci c prices (or
bids), engage in shopping (or haggling), and securely complete online transactions. These easier problems have been the focus of micropayments research,
but the more fundamental problem of obtaining and representing preferences
in the rst place has gone largely unrecognized, perhaps due to an objectivist
bias that posits mathematical laws rather than subjective preferences as the
basis of a working economy, and due to the basic diculties in discovering and
specifying normally tacit preferences.
Given the solution of other transaction cost problems, mental accounting
costs then become subject to the limit on the process of communicating preferences { whether via the mental accounting choice of one good over another,
or through creating a unique and suciently accurate software simulucrum of
a shopper's preferences which then completes the budgeting, bargaining and
purchasing process. To what extent and with what eciency can (a) a shopper
communicate subjective preferences to software, and (b) can software represent
and act in the interests of these objecti ed preferences? The presence of search
engines, catalog order forms, marketing surveys, and more sophisticated interactions like re y demonstrate that such communication and representation is
both feasible and important, but seems to be costly and perhaps fundamentally
limited in some way(s).

5 Cash Flow Uncertainty and Insurance
The rst source of customer mental transaction costs we will examine is his
uncertainty over his future cash ows. We can characterize two kinds of uncertainty customers have about their future cash ows:
1. Uncertainty of income
2. Uncertainty of expenditures, i.e. uncertainty about future preferences
and the tradeo s between preferences in di erent time periods. This kind of
uncertainty also plays a role in a subsequent section, "Incomplete and Costly
6

Decision Making".
A at fee constitutes an embedded, implicit insurance contract. [AL95] discusses some apsects of risk preferences implicitly embedded in economic transactions. Such implicit insurance is also a hypotheses of [CL79] to explain customer
preference for at fees in the telephone industry.
Customer costs are especially high when customer has a xed income and
high cost of credit and/or lack of savings against variable, too costly to calculate
or predict preferences for the amount or mix of trade items to be purchased.
The risk posed to the customer is not best understood as running out of
money per se, but rather as the starvation of other preferences due to uncertainties in estimating future resources available to be expended on preferences
to be satis ed in the future.
Unexpected lack of cash leads to unsatis ed preferences. Uncertainty about
cash availability leads to cognitive cost and incompleteness in deciding how to
normalize preferences between two time periods.
An simplifying approach to formalizing uncertainty of income would be to assume that attributes can be observed perfectly and costlessly, and all attributes
accounted for perfectly and costlessly, while the customer retains uncertainty
about his future incomes.
This customer risk must be traded o against the risk to the vendor of resource overuse { analogous, in this implicit insurance contract, to moral hazard,
but not hidden from vendor. In most retail situations, the vendor's ability to
control these risks (by hedging, spreading costs, etc.) are usually much lower
than the consumer's. A at fee can also protect the customer against later
opportunistic behavior by the supplier where customer switching costs are high.

5.1 Delegation

When the customer delegates purchase of a product or service over a given
period to an agent, a at fee limits the exposure of the priciple/customer (but
not the supplier) to abuse of the resource by the agent. Again this can be
desirable where the supplier is better able than the customer to plan these uses,
and spread out the costs of such resource usage across many customers.
A per unit fee with a xed upper limit (e.g. phone card) can make it easier
to use variable rate systems while maintaining cash ow. This converts the
implicit contract from risk spreading insurance with average price to just a big
"deductable". This remedy maintains the risk of starving preferences for this
good, but eliminates (at some cost) the risks of general preference starvation
due to running out of cash.

6 Attribute Observation Costs
The second source of customer mental transaction costs we will look at is the
cost and error involved in observing the attributes of products and services. We
introduced this problem above.
7

That customer veri cation of quality imposes a sign cant economic cost
has been discussed since at least Charles Babbage[B1835]. Recent attempts to
clarify the nature of these costs include ([A70], [B82]).

6.1 Attribute Observation

Attributes observed are seldom the attributes truly valued. In a previous section
we mentioned that Barzel [B82] in particular has studied this issue. In this
paper, we don't presume the observer summarizes observations as numerical
values. So in contrast to Barzel's term measurement, we will stick with the more
general observation. In a proxy observation, product or service X is observed by
attributes X , whereas it is valued for attributes X which are often tacit.
o

v

6.2 Blind Selling With a Trusted Brand

[B92] and [KK83] developed the following scenario, which suggests the scenario
below for Web micropayments.
Recall the apples. Assume that the proxy attribute of color is positively
correlated with taste. In an open bin, customers would use this attribute to
select the best colored apples, leaving the pale and spotted ones for the deep
discount bin or waste.
A buyer who is convinced that he received a random selection from an optimally observe commodity will not use additional resources for observation. An
example of blind selling is the sale of apples in an opaque bag. As long as the
brand is trustworthy, the customers save on the costs of competing with each
other for picking out the best colored apples.
Blind selling requires brand names trusted with either (1) uniformity of
good or (2) representative randomness, supressing particular information to
force random choice on all buyers.

6.3 A Pay-Per-Click Scheme

There has been oating for a while the idea of "pay per click", a micropayment
for every click on the Web to pay its owner for content. However, since there
has been no chance to browse the content, there is no way to directly assertain
whether it meets tacit preferences: there is no accurate customer observable
explicit preference. Browsing a preview or book cover is still inaccurate, and
entails increasing mental costs the more accurateit is.
One possible x is for the shopper's software to compare purchase prices
against a "consumer reports" service. We here examine a similar idea, that of
branding the links.
As an example of how one might deal with attribute observation costs, we
need to develop a proxy attribute of suciently high accuracy and low cost.
To this end we introduce a scenario of branded links to micropriced content.
A famous brand blesses the link with its logo. There might be di erent logos
for di erent kinds of content, specialty content, etc. (e.g., an academic journal
8

could peer review and then brand articles in its specialty). Individual authors
of sucient repute might create their own brands. This entails an investment
in a single author by a signi cant number (but proportionately only a very
small market share) of customers of a substantial fraction of their "brand name
tracking budget".
This highlights a problem with branding content: the brands take into account only widely shared values, not personal values. This doesn't work as
well for content for which tastes are idiosyncratic in such a way that they can't
be organized into a specialty. The more specialties branded per customer, the
higher the congntitive costs of keeping track of all the brand names.

6.4 Switching Costs

Another problem of branded links is that we haven't eliminated mental transaction costs. We've only changed their nature, hopefully in the process reducing
them. Brand name evaluation itself imposes cognitive costs. In particular,
brands require customers to invest in observing and recalling the quality history of the brand. This investment creates "brand loyalty" or switching costs,
studied by [K95].
Combined with uncertainty by the consumer about the future price, such
investments incentivize the creation of long-term contracts in place of spot
prices[W85], or at fees instead of micropayments.

6.5 Hidden Attributes in Transaction Processing Software

One important task of business transactions, that has been largely overlooked by
traditional electronic commerce, is critical to "the meeting of the minds" that is
at the heart of a contract: communicating the semantics of the protocols to the
parties involved. There is ample opportunity in electronic commerce for "smart
ne print": actions taken by the software hidden from a party to the transaction.
For example, grocery store POS machines don't tell customers whether or not
their names are being linked to their purchases in a database. The clerks don't
even know, and they've processed thousands of such transactions under their
noses. Thus, via hidden action of the software, the customer is giving away
information they might consider valuable or con dential, but the contract has
been drafted, and transaction has been designed, in such a way as to hide those
important parts of that transaction from the customer.
Without user interfaces electronic commerce is largely invisible, like the electronics in newer car engines. This is both a blessing - counterparties don't have
to feel like they're dealing with user-hostile computers - and a curse - the "smart
ne print" problem of hidden actions.
Here's a little example of smart ne print:
g

if (x == true)f
display ( "x is false" );

9

To properly communicate transaction semantics, we need good visual metaphors
for the elements of the contract. These would hide the details of the protocol without surrendering control over the knowledge and execution of contract
terms. This is discussed further in a subsequent section.
One way to guard against hidden actions is specify more contractual detail
to cover more exceptional situations and prevent more strategic opportunities.
Hower, this is also both incomplete and costly[W85].

7 Incomplete and Costly Decision Making
Assuming, for the moment, perfect information on the product at hand, and no
uncertainty as to future cash ows, a third and more basic source of customer
cognitive cost remains, namely the cost of making decisions with a large, but
neverthless very incomplete, set of alternatives.

7.1 Decision Making

The incompleteness of decision making follows from the incompleteness of the
observation of all the attributes in the world which might be preferred. It
has also been argued on other grounds that decision theory, the basis for most
economic theories of preferences, is incomplete, e.g. Pettit [P91].
When balancing a portfolio of preferences, The number alternatives which
might be considered, while miniscule compared to the number of alternatives actually in the world, is so vast as to be quite probably computationally infeasible
to search through when making a decision about a particular trade item. The
completeness with which preference tradeo s can be made locally and eciently
is not clear [K88].

7.2 Tacit Preferences

A model of making decisions, which encompasses everything from a highly
heuristic computation to a complete table of alternatives, can be provided by
positing a function from attributes and preferences to decisions:
T : customer tacit preference rule
a : customer and supplier observed attribute
p : customer and supplier observed preference for attribute
preference formation function (tacit preference rule): T : a ! p
A similar tacit rule can be speci ed for attributes as observed only by the
customer.
We call this "tacit", because such rules need not be articulated to function
properly, and probably are not in practice. In particular, "preference elicitation"
in the economic literature elicits only the output, supplier observed explicit preferences, not the rule itself, nor alternative preferences foregone in the observed
decision. Polanyi [P58] among others has argued that most human decision
making is tacit.
c

c;s

c;s

c

10

c

c;s

In practice there will be another function to precalculate information to feed
into the tacit preference rule, to conserve on realtime cognitive costs which are
more expensive than at-leisure cognitive costs.
Another source of incompleteness is the inability to predict preferences prior
to being shown attributes which might be preferred { because the decision making process is based on an abstract tacit rule rather than knowledge of all the
particular attributes which might be encountered. Due to incomplete induction
from preferences for speci c attributes to general rules, the customer often can't
express preferences without the stimulus of observing attributes, even in cases
where the attribute has been observed before in other contexts.

7.3 Intertemporal Tacit Preferences

Preference formation, in this theory, occurs at least partially at the time novel
attributes are observed. These attributes are fed into the tacit preference rule,
resulting in decisions, or explicit preferences. How, then, can tradeo s be made
against future preferences when the nature of those preferences are often not
yet well known? The tacit rule res at time t1 , then again at t2 : how can these
two evaluations of the rule be made commensurable?
Tacit preferences are a rich area for future work in characterizing mental
transaction costs.

8 Preferences and Visual Metaphors
To assess the desirability of a transaction, and to avoid being mischarged, the
parties to a transaction have to count up, i.e. account for, the money paid for
particular products and services { whether making sure that cash payments ar
made as promised (eg looking at the display as products are scanned at the
store, or the receipt afterwards), or making sure the phone bill is proper. In
this section "accounting" is used in this broad sense.
A customer may be paying in cash, but he'd often still like to keep track of
how and why his cash is going in and out. A transaction log is the most used
tool to assist in this task. There may be other metaphors more appropriate
for some circumstances (eg, eg absolute level gauges, rate gauges with high and
low water marks, etc.); this is a potentially fertile new eld to explore. There
may be agents that can do some of the accounting (eg comparing payments
made to terms promised, payment limits, etc.), but for the vast majority of
products and services software cannot judge the quality or personal desire for
the product or service, and thus the net desirability of the transaction. The
user must undertake this comparison with whatever information the computer
can provide via the display. The user interface and the cognition of the user
thus remain the bottleneck to transaction granularity.
A big task is to use the power of graphical user interface to come up with
new metaphors to make this easier. It is the intuitive yet accurate metaphor
that will lower accounting costs. Cryptographic protocols potentially lower only
11

security-related transaction costs such as forgery and extortion. For the normal
accounting transaction costs, which are currently too high for micropayments,
we need better interactive visual metaphors.
For transactions free of records, we need transactions that can be fairly
transacted once, immediately accounted for by the parties via a nice visual
metaphor, then forgotten. The potential for unresolvable disputes in recordfree systems is vast for transactions where this is not possible (probably most
of desired commerce: where quality of a product or service cannot be well
determined until after the purchase transaction is complete, or where credit is
involved).
Price is one kind of contractual term; we also need nice metaphors to keep
track of other kinds of contractual terms. Lack of observability of the protocol
on the part of the user leads to the ability of the counterparty to engage in
hidden actions. See [S97] for further discussion of this and other computerized
contracting issues.
One of the barriers to creating good contracts is determining what the parties
want in the rst place. People tend to think in terms of standard or stereotyped
conditions: payment in dollars, investing in stocks, etc. when there exist a
far wider variety of alternative contractual structures that, combined properly,
could better meet the parties' needs. It would be useful to have tools which allow
parties to explore their desires interactively with the computer. In nance this
might include interactive personal yield curves, determining the partial order
of desires (as in decision theory) for particular alternate securities, derivatives,
and synthetics; and so on. Software would then analyze this input, make recommendations, and even undertake automated contracting. Metaphors should
be developed so that make it easy for lay users to express such desires without
extensive knowledge of nance or decision theory. Such metaphors would provide a friendly front end to automated exchanges, auctions, and other online
contracting mechanisms.
One particular metaphor is the personal budget, such as the kind which
can be kept in Quicken(tm) software. In writing down a budget, the customer
creates a crude simulacra of his expected tacit preferences, expressed in a very
abstract form.

9 Conclusion
Some work has been done to determine customer preferences for usage versus
at rates. A recent attempt for Internet commerce is INDEX (the INternet
Demand Experiment) [I99]. The Internet in general (and AOL in particular is
a good example) has seen movement away from hourly or usage fees to at fees.
There was also work done in phone company studies during U.S. deregulation. [FOS97] references and discusses some of the empirical evidence, originally
presented in [CL79] and related work, showing customer preference for at fees
in the telephone industry.
A lesson for micropayment e orts is that mental costs usually exceed, and
12

often dwarf, the computational costs. Reductions in the per transaction computational costs of transactions may often be economically insigni cant. Other
transaction costs addressable by hardware or software, such as security concerns,
as well as costs of better communicating product quality versus price tradeo s
in the user interface, are usually more important objectives for technological
cost reduction than conserving on computational or network resources.
We have seen how customer mental transaction costs can derive from at
least three sources: uncertain cash ows, incomplete and costly observation of
product attributes, and incomplete and costly decision making. These costs
will increasingly dominate the technological costs of payment systems, setting
a limit on the granularity of bundling and pricing. Prices don't come for free.

10 References
[A70] Akerlof, G.A., "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488-500.
[AL95] Allen, D.W. and Lueck, D. (1995), 'Risk Preferences and the Economics of Contracts', 5 American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
447-451.
[B1835] Babbage, C. On the economy of machinery and manufactures, 4th
ed. New York: Kelley, 1963. (Facsimile reprint of the edition published in
London by Knight, 1835).
[Be95] Bellare, M. et. al., "A Family of Secure Electronic Payment Protocols", Proceedings of the Usenix Electronic Commerce Workshop, 1995
[Bz82] Barzel, Y., "Measurement Costs and the Organization of Markets,"
Journal of Law and Economics, 25, 27-48.
[BB97] Bakos, Y., and Brynjolfsson, E. "Aggregation and disaggregation of
information goods: Implications for bundling, site licensing and micropayment
systems." In Internet Publishing and Beyond: The Economics of Digital Information and Intellectual Property. D. Hurley, B. Kahin, and H. Varian, eds.,
MIT Press. Also at http://www.gsm.uci.edu/ bakos/aig/aig.html
[CL79] Cosgrove, J. G., and Linhart, P. B., "Customer choices under local
measured telephone service.", Public Utilities Fortnightly, Aug. 30, 27-31.
[FOS97] Fishburn, P, Odlyzko, A.M., and Siders, R.C., "Fixed fee versus unit
pricing for information goods: competition, equilibria, and price wars", First
Monday, Vol.2 No.7 - July 7th. 1997, http://www. rstmonday.dk/issues/issue2 7/
odlyzko/index.html
[GMAGS95] Glassman, S., Manasse, M. Abadi, M., Gauthier, P.S., "The
MilliCent Protocol for Inexpensive Electronic Commerce", Proceedings of the
4th International World Wide Web Conference { December, 1995. For proposed
uses, see http://www.millicent.digital.com/works/white papers/index.html
[H45] Hayek, F. "The Use of Knowledge in Society", American Economic
Review, 35 (September 1945): 519-530
[H89] Hart, O., "Incomplete Contracts," In: John Eatwell, Murray Milgate,
and Peter Newman (eds.), The New Palgrave: Allocation, Information, and
13

Markets. New York: Norton.
[I99] http://www.index.berkeley.edu
[K88] Kreps, D. M., Notes on the Theory of Choice, Westview, 1988
[K95] Klemperer, P., "Competition When Consumers Have Switching Costs:
An Overview with Applications to Industrial Organization, Macroeconomics,
and International Trade", Review of Economic Studies 62(4) pages 515-39.
[KK83] Kenney, R. W. and Klein, B., "The Economics of Block Booking",
Journal of Law and Economics, 26, 497-541.
[M35] Mises, L. v. Human Action, 3d edition (Regnergy, 1996)
[MD88] Miller, M. and Drexler., K.E., "Markets and Computation: Agorics
Open Systems", in The Ecology of Computation, Bernardo Huberman (ed.)
Elsevier Science Publishers/North-Holland, 1988.
[N98] Nielsen, J., "The Case for Micropayments", Jakob Nielsen's Alertbox
for January 25, 1998, http://www.useit.com/alertbox/980125.html. See also
sidebar "User Interfaces for Internet Payments" and reader comments.
[P58] Polanyi, M. Personal Knowledge, University of Chicago Press, 1958
[P91] Pettit, P., "Decision Theory and Folk Psychology", in Bacharach,
Michael and Hurley, Susan ed., Foundations of Decision Theory, Blackwell,
1991
[RS96] Rivest, R.L. and Shamir, A. "PayWord and MicroMint{Two Simple
Micropayment Schemes", CryptoBytes, volume 2, number 1 (RSA Laboratories,
Spring 1996), 7{11
[S97] Szabo, N. (1997) "Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public
Networks", First Monday, Vol.2 No.9 - September 1st. 1997, http://www. rstmonday.dk/
issues/issue2 9/szabo/index.html
[W85] Williamson, O. E. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, Free
Press/McMillan, 1985

11 Acknowledgements
My thanks to Robert Horn, Hal Varian, Doug Barnes, Ian Grigg, and others for
their helpful comments.
